should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
what happened in the 19th century not
just with contagious diseases but with
the typhus and cholera epidemics of the
1840s and early 1850s which were
devastating just wiped out you know
people would be kind of sick on Sunday
and dead on Wednesday that created a
model in Western history that allowed
later regimes to to emulate the model of
kind of
narrating the danger of infectious
diseases certainly using that element of
disgust and contamination and
existential threat as a pretext for what
authoritarians always want to do which
is eradicate Liberties and consolidate
control so I think it is happening on
two fronts right it happens organically
on the
um psychological front but then the
state jumps in and says well we can save
you from this existential threat just
hand over all your rights
[Music]
hello everyone I'm pleased today to talk
to a thinker on the Progressive front uh
for many decades Dr Naomi wolf an
American author and journalist her first
book The Beauty myth challenged Notions
of Attraction arguing that they are
societally fabricated this publication
became an international bestseller and
cemented wolf is one of the leading
spokeswomen for the so-called third wave
feminist movement in recent years
interestingly enough she's come under
Fire
especially on the left for becoming an
anti-vaxxer and a conspiracy theorist a
strange destination for a progressive
thinker which led wolf to write her most
recent book the bodies of others the new
authoritarians covid-19 and the war
against human looking forward very much
to talking to Dr Wolf today to delve
into the
possession of the left uh reprehensible
position in her estimation by the
Marxist doctrines that were popularized
throughout the 20th century to
understand how that's come about and to
analyze the role played by organizations
such as the Chinese Communist Party
I guess the first question I have for
you Dr Wolf is why did you why did you
agree to talk to me
why wouldn't I
oh well lots of people don't I've asked
all sorts of people on the left for
years to appear on my podcast and that
standard answer is now I don't know
precisely by the way if you you can be
placed politically on the left I know
your views have changed somewhat
dramatically over time and we're going
to investigate that but no I've I've
invited people especially political
figures on the left to speak with me
repeatedly dozens of times with uh with
no
um success let's say so it's not a
foregone conclusion most of the
scientists and so forth that I ask to
talk are
with very few exceptions say yes but
that's definitely not true on the more
social commentary political side
especially
in the political realm so
but it didn't it wasn't an issue as far
as you were concerned well I guess first
I would say I'll talk to anyone
especially about Liberty and the
Constitution and human rights and and
freedom
um I think that's my job and
it would be a very boring world if we
only spoke to people with whom we know
already we're going to agree and more
importantly maybe
um
talk to you because
um well for that reason uh but also
because
I you know I see that you describe
yourself as a liberal and well
from the outside it may seem as if my
views have changed over the last couple
of years I really feel that they I've
stayed exactly the same and that the
world has changed and um I also see
myself as classical liberal so even if I
didn't I want to talk to you because I
like learning things and I like talking
to people with whom I may not agree I
might learn something
um but either way
um you know since you're you seem to be
concerned about human freedom and I'm
concerned about human freedom
additionally it wouldn't occur to me not
to talk to you that said
that said I recognize your experience
sadly I'm now in a situation in which I
keep asking the left to counter you know
the views that I'm publishing by other
people on my news site you know I'm
asking the left to engage with um the
issues that I'm bringing up and I
literally cannot get anyone to talk to
me and I used to be you know until like
two and a half years ago and firmly
esconched in the left as a cultural
figure
right well so I definitely want to delve
into that because one of the things I
really have observed like I think I'm
reasonably neutral as a psychological
Observer of political Behavior I believe
and and certainly one of the things I
have noticed is that proclivity to
cancel is most fundamentally a left-wing
phenomena I've had very few people on
the right refuse to talk to me that's
for sure and I've had many even my
friends on the left
and I've seen this in a relatively
shocking way I would say fairly
frequently would refuse to talk to
people that weren't in their bailiwick I
think one of the punishments actually
this is odd though one of the
punishments for refusing to talk to
people who whose opinions differ from
yours is you end up squabbling with the
people who disagree with you on your
side over smaller and smaller things
even equally intently so it's not like
you rid yourself of the necessity of
disagreement you just find yourself what
did Freud call that the narcissism of
small differences the battles get they
rage more and more intently over smaller
and smaller differences of opinion which
is sort of comical in a metaphysical way
so let's start with your
let's start with your childhood so
um tell me about tell me a little bit
about your parents and about what it was
like for you growing up and I'm
interested in how your intellectual
interests developed
sure
um I will just note before I do that
that's a change I think Dr Peterson on
the left
um it didn't used to be the case just
five years ago that uh it was canceling
we can talk about that later if you like
it's really important I think that these
are non-western norms that
um that have been kind of implanted in
Western
cultural discourse it would have been
shameful to cancel an opponent rather
than engage with him or her
um you know in very recent memory so
um I was born in San Francisco uh I mean
I think I'm exactly the same age you are
and I grew up in a I guess an academic
household my dad was a professor of
English literature at San Francisco
State University my mom was a graduate
student in anthropology when I was
growing up
um Jewish uh middle class household
um very creative environment my father
is also a poet and a teacher of creative
writing so it was a very talky ready
um
imagination heavy environment and you
know I was surrounded by the cultural
ferment of the 60s and 70s in San
Francisco so by the time I was a
teenager you know the gay lgbtq right at
that time was called the gay and lesbian
Liberation movement the women's movement
um you know immigrants rights uh it was
all kind of um a lot of social justice
movements around me as I was growing up
and it seemed like the world was going
to be fixed really I mean it was very
optimistic
um very beautiful place to grow up and
then I went to Yale uh and that was a
shock because I'd never you know I'm a
I'm a California girl so I'd never
experienced East Coast elitism
hierarchies
um and semitism you know before the
peculiar racism of the p the Northeast I
mean if you grew up in California it's a
very diverse uh culture you know the
it's not that we don't have racism in
California but it's it's different it's
a more inclusive Society it's less class
bound so that was a shock
um so that was when did you and you did
an undergraduate at Yale I was an
undergraduate Yale in English literature
and what what year
uh 1980 to 1984.
80 to 84. yeah okay yeah so yeah so we
we do overlap almost perfectly in terms
of of of of birth date Age and and
education time and so
what what exactly did you experience at
Yale like how did that prejudicial
environment make itself manifest to you
as far as you were concerned and was
that something that other people were
experiencing too or was there something
do you think about your background apart
from the Semitic element of it was there
something about your background do you
think that tilted your experience more
in that direction how much of that was
situational and how much personal in
retrospect well it was pretty uh
time it had only recently allowed women
in um I think in about 1976 and so still
a super sexist place
um and uh and and you know and and a lot
of casual
um kind of Date Rape and what we would
today call sexual harassment that wasn't
I think I think that was only recently
codified or not yet fully codified at
that time I'll have to check but
um so you sort of felt you know I was
not the only woman who felt beleaguered
I mean you know the parties at Yale in
my time were described in Brett
Kavanaugh's hearings and they were very
familiar to me you know people did get
kind of raped and molested at parties
um you know very very casually at Yale
uh and there was what what do you think
the attitude of the typical male
undergraduate at that point I don't know
if we would talk about the typical male
undergraduate or we if we would talk
about the more dangerous typical male
undergraduate what do you think the
attitude towards women was at that time
and I mean I'm also interested in the
sexual misbehavior problem
from uh
a variety of psychological viewpoints
mean a huge part of
what
fuels sexual misbehavior on campus
alcoholism right yeah I mean your
language I think is is an interesting
difference between us I would call it um
criminal activity on campus
oh okay okay well I I I I'm I'm not I
suppose trying to make the point that
that's not the case I've thought a lot
about how
those sorts of activities might be
addressed and regulated by universities
and they're alcohol fueled to a degree
that's almost unimaginable so alcohol
itself is responsible for about 50
percent of violent crimes and it's the
only drug we know that actually makes
people violent and so
so I'm I'm wondering the parties that
you're describing mean we know perfectly
well that there's a party culture at
American universities and that that is
alcohol fueled and there's a an alcohol
is a very disinhibiting drug and so if
you have a proclivity in a particular
direction
the alcohol is going to take all the
stops off that so if there's an
underlying misogyny or or resentment say
towards women then that's going to be
Amplified by an alcohol-fueled event I'm
not trying to make a case for or against
the presence of misogyny at Yale I'm
just wondering in retrospect when you
look at that
what contributing factors do you see to
what you to to what you experienced yeah
so you're I mean we're diving right into
an incredibly you know vexed and uh
difficult subject but I'm happy to
address it so you know I and and I'm
glad to be addressing it because that's
one of the reasons I wanted to talk to
you I know about your interest in gender
Dynamics
um and
you know this is probably one of those
areas on which we might have a lot of
interesting disagreements
um
so I would say categorically alcohol you
can't blame the uh culture of sexual
accepted sexual violence and sexual
harassment at Yale at that time on
alcohol or drugs
um at all uh the what you can blame it
on is institutional toleration of sexual
harassment and sexual violence I mean in
other words there was a culture of
impunity the people who knew that
nothing would happen to them acted as if
nothing would happen to them and I too
have studied you know
gender Dynamic sexual assault sexual
harassment on campus for many decades
and for sure when there's a culture of
impunity in any institution rapists rape
molesters molest and when there's a
culture of um consequences
um
that that restricts um the tendencies
that those people might have to rape or
harass you know for sure but what the
young men around us at Yale and the
faculty around us at Yale knew is that
nothing bad would happen to them if they
raped or molested women and and
categorically if you look at the cases
at that time you know to this day to
some extent the institution colluded in
covering up rapes on campus uh
protecting athletes especially who
assaulted women on campus protecting
faculty so I personally was molested by
a famous Professor Dr Harold Bloom when
I was a junior and that was in a context
in which he was completely not drinking
alcohol it was a context in which he and
he had a a lengthy reputation which I
didn't know till afterwards of doing
this to undergraduate women and two
actually graduate students
um and and I tried to get accountability
from the institution
um decades later and
and it was just covered up covered up
um how old were you when that happened I
was 19 years old
and what what effect did that have on
you metaphysically
well I think it had a last lifelong
effect on me metaphysically um it was it
was quite terrifying at the time
um because it was in a
like in no way can this situation be you
know blamed on on you know anyone not
know exactly what she was doing
um it was a situation in which
he was my uh advisor he was my professor
for an independent study course that
that
my academic advisor had recommended a
close colleague of his another famous
academic John Hollander
um it was a I was writing poetry I was a
very talented poet I was getting lots of
awards and recognition for being a poet
and
um
and you know he encouraged me to take
this independent study with him he
ignored and ignored and ignored my
submissions all semester I was looking
at the end of the semester with no uh
no no evaluation and I didn't come from
wealthy background I had to get a
scholarship to to go into graduate
school I was going to apply for a Rhodes
scholarship so for many reasons
including just you know I was a student
I needed an evaluation finally he said I
you know I will come to your house where
you live and I will talk about your
manuscript of poetry at that time and
that seemed
almost normal because he worked with my
roommate's boyfriend in a project an
editorial project
um so we all had a dinner party at his
recommendation and then everyone left
and I thought he was going to evaluate
my my semester's work as he had promised
to do and he assaulted me basically and
we were alone in a house and
you know there was no one I could you
know I couldn't get away he was huge he
was between me and the door
it was terrifying you know I mean he
didn't get far he put his hand on my
thigh and I backed away from him and
kind of got as far away from him as I
could and then he kind of got between me
and the door and
um
I mean eventually
eventually he left but that
I mean first of all I had been you know
raped as a child 11 years before so
which you know when I try to talk about
assault on campus and you know
professors creating an environment of
sexual assault on campus a third of of
minor women have been raped or assaulted
or abused by trusted male role models by
the or parent figures or parents by the
time they're 18. so you know I was
already traumatized and I was already
terrified and so
in a situation like that too because I
imagine that you're
so you're a good poet at that point
undoubtedly you're extremely excited
about the fact that someone who's an
eminent scholar is taking an interest in
and is going to evaluate your work and
so you're looking forward to that on
that front and then you find yourself in
a situation where
well exactly the opposite of what is
supposed to happen is happening to put
it mildly and you said also that that
was reminiscent of treatment that you
had received at the hands of another man
much earlier in your life so this is
kind of this important moment where
we're a little bit
talking
um
not in the same experiential plane
because
all of those considerations certainly
you know would would arise you know
months or years later right but but what
I was concerned about at that moment was
survival because I did not know it would
kill me you know because when women are
raped or molested especially very young
women you know you don't know that this
person is not going to kill you right
you you don't know that you're going to
get out of this situation alive and
and I wish you know everyone who runs
the university I wish that they would
understand that that is what is the
experience of someone who is in a
situation of being molested or raped
that they literally you know don't know
if they're going to get out of it alive
because it is such a terrifying surreal
uh shocking
um you know assault it's it's an assault
so joke after the fact you know this is
why judges and juries and administrators
always misunderstand rape and sexual
assault after the fact it's like well
you know he didn't get very far well you
know you didn't get hurt very much or
you know whatever it is but at the time
it's literally like am I going to die
you know what it does he have a knife
does he have a gun I mean it's
absolutely
a terror that I can't even describe to
you and it probably would have been even
if I hadn't been raped as a child right
but
you know there's not no way to minimize
how
existentially terrifying it is to be
molested by anyone bigger than you are
um who's standing between you in an exit
in a in a house that's far away from any
kind of help no one would have heard me
if I had screamed so
yeah well I wasn't trying I wasn't
trying to reduce what you had told me to
the the mere psychological consequence
of betrayal I was just
are attempting I suppose in some sense
to amplify it by pointing out that not
only did this happen to you but it
happened to you at the hands of someone
who was trusted and who was entrusted
with fostering your development and and
it's the Gap part of what constitutes
psychological trauma is the gap between
expected behavior and actual behavior
and in a situation where you're at the
hands of someone who has a Stellar
reputation and you're at an institution
that's supposed to guide and develop you
then the depth of be I mean if someone
attacks you in a dark alley in a rough
part of town that's a terrible thing but
there isn't that additional element of
betrayal of an entire institution and an
entire developmental pathway that goes
along with it that doesn't mean it isn't
awful it just misses one dimension of
awful right so thank you Dr Peterson I
so you're quite right I mean so sub so
the initial trauma was was just the
physical you know
definitely
terror terror the subsequent trauma you
know goes to what we were saying like
what allows a rape culture on campus and
you know that was when I brought this up
with people around me including my my um
my Dean and basically the you know 360
degree response from the institution was
he's well known for this don't do
anything about it he'll ruin your career
so um and you know other other women
tried to bring it up had their careers
destroyed so why didn't you have your
career destroyed
well I think I did have my career
destroyed I I wanted to be okay you know
I wanted to be a an English Professor a
professor in his same field I wanted to
teach Victorian literature English
literature that's all I wanted to do my
whole life and be a poet and I had to
take a complete detour
um for the next you know three decades
because he was still alive and and that
wasn't an option for me
um and even you know like all the way so
tell me tell tell me tell me exactly why
it wasn't an option for you like what
what were the mechanics of the
impositions that were put in front of
you as a consequence of the sequence of
events so I mean I know he was very
influential and I I can understand
vaguely why that would have had a
cascading consequence but had you
continued pursuing your
um your education in the literature
domain why exactly would it have been
that you wouldn't have been able to find
the kind of academic job for example
that your background might have uh might
have otherwise provided for you
um well that's a good question
I I guess he casts such a gigantic
Shadow over the whole
field
um I mean he was the great Authority in
Victorian studies
um you know at for decades after that
you know and and it was just
communicated to me that I couldn't get
uh
a letter of recommendation I couldn't
get obviously I wasn't gonna even be in
the same room with him to solicit a
letter of recommendation but it it was
communicated to me that
the the way
into graduate school like if I applied
to any graduate school and and they saw
that he had been on my transcript they
would have said why don't you have a
letter from Dr blue yeah okay okay okay
I see yeah yeah and what's funny because
that's a glare that's a glaring Omission
totally and then that would have been up
for questions
and and whatever he wants to say he'll
say and and that was also communicated
to me clearly by people who cared about
me who were warning me he you know he
had done that before right it didn't
even take women coming forward for him
to ruin their careers if he had you know
molested them or approached them and
they'd rejected him which I had done I
guess in his view
um
he he made he closed every door
academically so it was clear to me that
I had no future in My Chosen field as
long as he was alive so I had to you
know do something that was not my plan I
didn't plan to be a you know feminist
activist non-fiction writer in a popular
non-fiction genre for decades I'm happy
to have had eight International
bestsellers but that wasn't what I
wanted I wanted to be a university
professor and then even as late as I
went back to school I'm fast forwarding
a little bit I thought it was safe
because he was very elderly to go back
to to college so I became a Rhodes
scholar in spite of him and I went to
Oxford and I'll you know fast forward so
it was finally I was like almost 50 and
I thought okay it's safe to resume my
education and become a professor of
English literature went back to Oxford
in midlife I finished my d-fill
um in Victorian studies and
when I submitted my defill and I
succeeded and I passed my academic
advisor at Oxford said you you need to
submit this to
um a journal uh you know Victorian
studies journal and and and you've got
to submit and you know it's edited by
Harold Bloom you know you've gotta
you've gotta submit this this is you
know really distinguished work and I I
said I can't I can't submit it to that
journal um and I had to tell her why so
that late and she agreed she agreed you
know that was how many years later that
was like 30 years later
where it can't be 30 yeah no 30 years
old so as as far as you're concerned
this event
side tracked you into an uh my domain of
academic Pursuit that was very unlike
okay how much
how much do you think
look first of all I should say if I'm
gonna push you into places that you
really don't want to talk about you just
tell me okay because I'll back off and
I'll talk about anything I'll tell you
I'm a grown-up go ahead and ask so so
to what degree do you think the
psychological consequences of what
befell you
as well as the Practical consequence
colored your writing and the
the aims towards which you directed your
writing from then on forward like what
would have you written about do you
think had this not happened
what would have been your natural
inclination of Interest I mean all I
ever wanted to do was teach
you know I would have been writing about
Ruskin
so you would have stuck relatively
firmly you think to something like
classical literary criticism yep
so I should point out for everyone who's
watching and listening because it isn't
exactly obvious what the point of
literary criticism is if you're not uh
knowledgeable about the field and it's
easy to underestimate its significance
in literary critics
analyze
Productions of fiction generally
speaking they analyze stories and that
turns out to be of
utmost importance and we've become more
clear about that on the psychological
front in recent years because the
structures through which we view the
world women described our stories and so
what literary critics do in the deepest
sense is to analyze the maps that we use
to orient ourselves in the world and
there isn't anything more important in
your life than getting your story
straight and people who are astute
literary critics don't sort of fry falls
into this category as far as I'm
concerned are extraordinarily helpful at
helping people Orient themselves in
terms of where they devote their
attention and their action and so it's
easy for people who aren't
intellectually oriented let's say and
who don't have a deep educational
history to not understand why literary
criticism is so important but it is very
important and so you are going to devote
yourself to Classic literary scholarship
but you got derailed and okay so now you
went from Yale to was it to Oxford as a
Rhodes scholar okay now okay now you you
said that you're
Ambitions to pursue a professorship in
English literature were derailed but you
did get a road scholarship and that's
not easy so how do you reconcile the
potentially competing claims that well
perhaps a career in English literature
would have still been open to you given
that your academic background was
positive enough so that you got a road
scholarship that's not a simple thing
yeah I can answer that easily um the
Rhodes scholarship committee was looking
for different things
um they don't
they weren't narrowly focused on
um
you know the gateway to uh credentialing
someone for Graduate Studies in English
literature they were looking for
leadership and you know uh
um I mean obviously my grades were good
overall and I was considered you know A
Gifted undergraduate I had lots of
letters from my other professors so it
was a different uh credentials so the
lack of letter from Bloom didn't wasn't
a stumbling block in relationship to the
Rhodes scholarship well that's a relief
well I mean sure but imagine Dr Peterson
if you had to succeed in an area that
was entirely not your choice for your
life yes well I could I can imagine that
because that's happened to be in the
last seven years so it's well I no
longer a professor at the University of
Toronto which wasn't exactly in my plans
in that respect we have had similar
Journeys I I have something that
happened now I had I had many decades of
of pursuing pretty much precisely what I
wanted to pursue so that's a major
difference but
um I have some experience with being
dislocated let's say
um in a manner that wasn't oh well you
know C'est La Vie things have worked out
quite well for me but it wasn't what I
had planned you know and so um and I
suppose that's the definition of life is
it isn't what you've planned all right
so now you went off to pursue the road
scholarship and what did you study as a
road scholar now you're at Oxford and
and what was it like what was it like
being at Oxford compared to being at
Yale well it was pretty exhilarating for
me because uh it was pure
academic
um
how can I put it well the Oxford
experience as you no doubt know is
completely different from an American
University in the sense that you have
these tiny uh seminars you have uh
tutorials with your professor your Don
and your like two students or three
students and the professor and
um and you kind of dive deeply into the
text in that in that
moment and it's a very very pure form of
scholarship so that made me very happy
because I am a true nerd and and again I
you know was working on Victorian
studies 19th century English literature
um I was working on an M Phil at that
time and
you know I loved it it was it was the
80s in Britain so it was cold and and
gloomy and thatchery and uh and and The
Graduate students weren't particularly
um
Central to the Oxford experience was a
very undergraduate experience but so we
were kind of Exiles together but it was
exhilarating and the road scholarship of
course what a privilege you know you're
you're you're you're you're
uh expenses are paid for two or three
years depending on what you choose to
just do it you know just study just
learn with a group of other really
bright of really bright people from all
over the world so it was a very
um
you know Blissful uh intellectual
experience and the the seed of my first
book
um was my my default thesis there or the
start of my default thesis
inflation has consequences as the FED
raises interest rates to combat
out-of-control government spending
long-term bonds are diminishing in value
which is crippling the banks depositors
are holding their breath and investors
are bailing on Bank stocks
diversification has never been more
important the recent surge in gold
prices is directly tied to an extremely
volatile Market that is why gold has
historically been a great hedge against
the stock market and against inflation
trust the experts at Birch gold group to
help you diversify into gold text Jordan
to 989898 to get a free info kit on gold
Birch gold will help you convert an
existing Ira or 401K into a tax
sheltered Ira in physical precious
metals with an A-Plus rating with the
Better Business Bureau thousands of
happy customers and countless five-star
reviews you can trust Birch gold to
protect your future text Jordan to
989898 to get your free info kit on gold
today then talk to one of their precious
metals Specialists that's Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
the culture that you'd experienced at
Yale that we already walked through how
how different or similar was your
experience on that front at Oxford now
you're a little older and you're with a
little older people so in principle the
level of average
reprehensible Behavior has decreased
somewhat just on those grounds alone but
were there Market differences in the in
the social culture let's say and in the
attitudes of the authorities that's
interesting well it was still
um you know still you know I can't
stress enough that I in part became a
famous feminist you know public
intellectual because
everywhere you went in the 80s uh women
could were not safe you know physically
I mean that's just the case so even at
Oxford you know certainly
um
rape took place with impunity uh there
was one
famous Professor who was always trying
to seduce his undergraduates
um but it was a lot you know Britain is
a less violent culture in general so it
didn't feel quite as systematically
unsafe and and I didn't feel as I'm
saying partly because it's a you know
it's a yeah it's just a less violent
culture
um but it I you know I'm not going to
say that those issues didn't warrant
still very alive on campus they were
um and in fact when I uh left Oxford and
I went to Edinburgh to write my first
book I worked at a Rape Crisis Center
and you know that too was at that time
the whole city all of that all of that
country was the culture of impunity look
Dr Peterson to this day you know like
six percent of rapes in Britain get
prosecuted and no one even keeps
statistics on how many of those get
convicted I mean it you know really
rapists have impunity I can't stress
that enough even now even with all the
changes that that there have been in
society um young women are somewhat
safer on college campuses because of
hard work of people like you know me and
my colleagues in the 80s and 90s and
early odds but
it is not you know it is not that
we still live in a culture in which
women
most of the women I know have been you
know raped or molested in some way and
vanishingly few of them have gotten any
kind of Justice at all you know from the
perpetrator but moving along
um I was very happy at Oxford and you
know generally it was a a less violent
culture
and so what question were you trying to
address or questions were you trying to
address when you were doing your
Master's work at Oxford what was what
was Paramount in your mind and why
so I was very interested in
um the
the image of women in in 19th century
novels uh this ideal that emerged in the
19th century in
well in virtually all of the great
novels
um you know certainly written by women
but also in in Dickens and in um George
Eliot uh of the this kind of passive
childlike doll-like
um beautiful uh kind of
inert figure and and I was interested in
that because
this uh passive inner stereotype of
femininity was emerging at just the time
that there was historically the first
wave of feminism in any Western Society
in other words women were organizing
they were organizing to defeat
um laws that were punitive in which
women who looked like prostitutes could
be taken off the street you know without
due process and they were organizing to
um you know have access to education to
have access to owning their own property
uh so that there was a very vibrant and
they were mobilizing for access to to
um primary education as well so right
when women were being empowered and
empowering themselves to change society
this inert
um kind of backlash figure uh got
constructed in as a cultural ideal so I
was writing about that
so let me ask you a question let me ask
you a question about that I mean the
representation of women in
Victorian era
literature in other countries I think
was broader than that so the women in
Tolstoy for example tosto is a very good
example I mean the females in Dostoevsky
novels are very complex psychologically
all his characters are but in tolstoy's
novels in particular you get the sense
that in the Victorian period and earlier
in in Imperial Russia that the women
were really running the society behind
the scenes now the men had the positions
of formal nomenclature but they were in
the tolstoyan world they were really
appendages to what was actually going on
the women were running society and
gluing Society together behind the
scenes and and I mean Tolstoy is more of
a sociologist in that regard but his
female characters certainly aren't
playing a secondary role even though
it's it's a behind the scenes rule in
some ways it's not a secondary rule at
all in fact I would argue the opposite
is the case in in tolstoy's world and I
have no idea to what degree that was
actually education
Imperial Russia but I suspect it was
probably the case to quite a degree yeah
well I'm sure it was the case
you know everywhere that women didn't
have full legal rights but I think
you're I think what you're saying is
exactly right but it's also respectfully
I think you know proofing the my thesis
which is which went on to kind of morph
into the thesis of the beauty myth which
was my first book which is that
um Britain was the place in which women
were
Up Above All European countries
advocating for their rights legally and
socially and economically therefore this
um backlash figure emerged whereas in
Imperial Russia women had virtually no
legal rights and so this backlash figure
didn't need to emerge they could be
portrayed in all of their complexity
um because they weren't a threat to the
status quo you you described the
Victorian English representation of
women in in the literary domain as a
backlash and I guess I'm curious about
which authors in particular you think
that was characteristic of and then why
you think that
there would be a backlash of that sort
like what's your literary critic
interpretation of the fact that that
phenomena emerged phenomenon emerged
yeah so I guess I focused most on
um Dickens doll-like characters
um but also if you look at Middle March
um there's a very common kind of pairing
in fiction in the middle of the 19th
century especially written by women in
which there's
um you know Dorothea kasabin who's
complex and
um has it rich in our life and is you
know quite a revolutionary in her own
right trying to change society
um and then her kind of antagonist her
antagonist who's this kind of you know
pretty usually blonde
um passive manipulative superficial
character and you see that kind of
dialectic in other novels at that time
but also just in in popular culture I
mean it was the dawn of
um the dawn of of popular uh you know
pop culture in the sense of lithography
and
um pretty soon photography by the 1840s
1850s and so you're also getting these
Beauty ideals uh which were impossible
of you know 17-inch waists corsets in
which women couldn't breathe
um literally the fashion of the middle
of the 19th century in contrast to just
like the 1820s 18 teens where you know
Jane Austen's time women could move
around right they could breathe they
could walk they could argue they could
uh you know Express their full
personalities even though they had no
legal rights by the 1850s with hoop
skirts that were kind of five feet in
diameter and posed a threat of you know
setting You Up in Flames got too near
the fire uh layers of petticoats um as I
mentioned Walden corsets that really
didn't let you take a deep breath of you
know clothing that weighed several
pounds just you know in terms of the
weight of of what you had to wear
changes of clothes multiple times a day
if you're middle class
um the fact that you're dragging your
skirts through kind of manure and mud uh
all of this in interestingly
um this kind of hampering fashion uh
came about at just those decades in
which women were asking let me ask you a
question about that a couple of
questions about that
um so the first I have two very
different questions the first is is that
syphilis really became a widespread
Public Health concern
amongst the victorians and it was a very
Dreadful disease and and took a very
large number of forms and also was
transmissible from mother to child and
interestingly enough
um
the Europeans when they hit
the Western Hemisphere brought a whole
host of extremely serious transmissible
diseases with them measles and mumps and
smallpox and that devastated the native
Community maybe up to 95 percent of the
Native community and the native
Community returned the favor in very
minor ways one of which apparently was
syphilis and so there was a real twist
in sexual mores that characterized the
Victorian period in part because
syphilis was such a terror I think the
age scare was nothing compared to the
syphilis scare and so it's hard to know
exactly what the emergent fact of
syphilis did to the
conceptualization of the relationships
between men and women on the sexual
front it certainly made prostitution for
example a much greater Public Health
danger and so and so that's one question
another question is the Victorian era
was um characterized by the generation
of a substantive amount of wealth and
one could argue that part of what was
happening on the Victorian Beauty front
was the advertisement by Aristocrats
that they could tolerate these this
encumbrance in the name of beauty
because they had the financial resources
to sustain it you know there's there's
an example of that biologically would be
in principle would be the peacock's tale
which is extraordinarily beautiful but
also quite the encumbrance and
apparently part of what it signifies
especially if it's perfectly symmetrical
and well-formed and heavy is that the
male who sports that plumage has
sufficient health and resources to pull
that off without dying and so now and it
seems to me that some of those Victorian
accesses are reasonably understood on
the biological front as manifestations
of that kind of
um what would you say
well it's it's an exuberance of display
on the sexual front now there might be
all sorts of negative consequences of
that in relationship to other elements
of women's well men and women's lives
but uh so well so those are two parallel
questions how do you think the emergence
of syphilis transformed the
relationships between men and women
politically and and and socially in
Victorian England in particular and what
do you think about the excess resource
hypothesis on the Victorian outfitting
front and people were getting quite Rich
at that point and that was certainly one
way of displaying it
right yeah I understand
um your questions so certainly you're
absolutely right about the spread of
syphilis and gonorrhea
um as very fundamental to
social concerns around sexuality in
Britain in the 19th century absolutely
and that was you know the source of the
contagious diseases acts was this
argument by the state and I think you
know I think
I I think it my most recent book
outrageous which addresses this the book
before my last one is about how how 19th
century
um viral uh epidemics including
um contagious diseases like gonorrhea
but also typhus and cholera were used by
the state as a kind of pretext for
controlling people and subverting their
civil liberties
um so definitely the argument of the
state was you know these prostitutes or
women who look like prostitutes or
vectors of disease they have to be
managed and controlled and the states
it's the state's role to
step into what had been very personal
spaces and um and mediate this for the
public good right we've seen that
there's a there's an emergent literature
on the
political biological front indicating
that one of the best predictors of
authoritarian political beliefs in every
any given geographical Locale so you can
do this
state by state or county by county or
country by country it scales is the
prevalence of infectious disease the
higher the prevalence of infectious
disease the higher the probability of
authoritarian political attitudes and
the correlation isn't like point one or
point two correlation is like 0.6 it's
an unbelievably powerful relationship
and it seems like an extension of what's
the What's called the behavioral immune
system and it can really
get going well we saw that during covid
right with instantaneous transformation
into something approximating
authoritarianism
and the motivational justification
what's so interesting and horrible about
this by the way is that that's not a
fear-based motivation
it's a disgust-based motivation and
disgust is a lot more aggressive than
fear because if you're afraid of
something you tend to avoid it whereas
if you're disgusted by something your
fundamental motivation is to eradicate
it by any means necessary if you look
for example at the language that Hitler
and his minions used when they were
ramping up their Public Health pathology
prevention pathology to extend out of
the mental asylums in the hospitals into
more broad ethnic cleansing all the
language they used was parasitism
discussed contamination all disease
Associated right yeah yeah so it's a
very powerful motivational system when
it gets activated absolutely no question
you know it's so interesting to take
care of your analysis from a
psychological point of view and I know
there's been important psychological
work done on disgust
um I I would actually say it from a
geopolitical perspective what happened
in the 19th century not just with
contagious diseases but with the typhus
and cholera epidemics of the 1840s and
early 1850s which were devastating just
wiped out you know people would be kind
of sick on Sunday and dead on Wednesday
um
that created a model in Western history
that allowed later regimes to to emulate
the model of kind of
narrating the danger of infectious
diseases certainly using that element of
disgust and contamination and
existential threat as a pretext for what
authoritarians always want to do which
is eradicate Liberties and consolidate
control so I think it is happening on
two fronts right it happens organically
on the
um psychological front but then the
state jumps in and says well we can save
you from this existential threat just
hand over all your rights
and I think that looking back you know
certainly Hitler and you know then later
other uh exploiters of this discourse um
either consciously or not
reference to remembered the
effectiveness of of the states that
being in the 19th century because what
the state did which is so fascinating is
that they created they solved the
infectious diseases Threat by creating a
network of sewers
um basil gets network of sewers under
London and the first Municipal sewage
system solved the problem largely it
saved people and so that was a fantastic
argument for the state to say look
individuals can't do this
um you know the individual home with its
with its cesspit with its you know
miasmas is the source of contamination
one person's private contamination
affects the commons therefore you need
the state to mediate the commons
um and the the metaphor that I look at
then is the like the internet right you
know they it established this idea that
there's a Commons between us uh that can
be contaminated from one person's
private space to another person's
private space and therefore the state
needs to patrol and please the commons
Elysium health is dedicated to tackling
the biggest challenge in health aging
and they make the benefits of Aging
research accessible to everyone Elysium
creates Innovative Health Products with
clinically proven ingredients that
enable customers to live healthy lives
Elysium works with leading institutions
like Oxford and Yale and they have
dozens of the world's best scientists
working with them eight of them are
Nobel Prize winners their Flagship
product basis focuses on NAD
supplementation which is a key component
in cellular aging they've sold over
three and a half million bottles of this
supplement alone
matter is a brain health supplement that
slows natural brain loss a recent survey
of doctors show that 92 percent of them
would recommend matter to combat brain
aging Elysium also offers cutting-edge
solutions to help support your
metabolism and immune system
if you're not sure where to start
consider their amazing tool for
measuring biological aging called index
not only will index assess how quickly
you've been aging across nine different
bodily systems but it will also
recommend simple changes to your
day-to-day life to change how quickly
you age in honor of DNA day for a
limited time Elysium is offering 15 off
site-wide on all Elysium products go to
elysiumhealth.com Jordan and enter code
dnad23 at checkout to claim this offer
before midnight on April 27th that's
elysiumhealth.com Jordan enter code
dnad23 for 15 off
yeah well there's a real analog between
the spread of information and the spread
of viruses which is obviously why we say
such things as it went viral it went
viral so right right well and there's a
real tension uh in human discourse that
seems to be key to the distinction
between conservatives and liberals is
the conservatives tend to be more
discussed sensitive and they're more
prone to react negatively to the
potentially contaminating effects of
interpersonal interaction and that could
be sexual or intellectual the the
liberal types are it's as if the
Liberals bet that the advantage to free
exchange will outperform the
disadvantage of contamination whereas
the conservatives tend to make the
opposite bet and the technical
complexity of that is that sometimes the
conservatives are right and sometimes
the Liberals are right right it depends
because the conservatives tend to be
more correct let's say when multiple
epidemics are raging out of control
whereas the Liberals tend to be more
correct when for whatever reason the uh
probability of genuine genuine contagion
is relatively low and you can take
advantage of cross-border freedom and
movement of information and people but
it's a continual battle because and you
know this also complicates the sexual
realm to an immense degree because
of course
sexual intercourse is an excellent
Vector for disease transmission and that
throws people into an existential
quandary constantly because obviously
the drive towards reproduction and the
derived towards sexual pleasure opens up
the danger on the epidemic front we
certainly saw that with the rise of AIDS
for example I mean there's no doubt
biologically speaking that the AIDS
virus mutated to take advantage of
certain forms of promiscuity and so
that's our absolute bloody catastrophe
and could have been in well an
apocalyptic catastrophe although we we
seem to have got more or less on top of
it there's always that Specter of
large-scale contamination lurking in the
background on the ideation land the
physical front and people certainly
differ widely in their instinctive
reactions to that too and so
um IQ is actually associated with
disgust sensitivity as it turns out so
the lower your IQ the more discussed
sensitive you are now the effect isn't
walloping but it's not negative well you
can also understand that because imagine
this is that the smarter you are the
more useful the free exchange of
information is because you can take
advantage of it well if you can't take
advantage of it you're differentially
exposed to the threat of contamination
and so that makes things as if things
aren't complicated enough already that
adds an additional dimension of
complexity one of the things that I
learned that was truly horrifying by the
way was the degree to which the
progressive campaign towards ethnic
extermination in Germany was driven by
public health concerns and a
hypothetical compassion that underlay
that if you if you examine that
developmentally it's actually quite
terrifying because the Nazis actually
started their what eventually became
their extermination campaigns with
public health campaigns that were quite
effective at eliminating tuberculosis
yeah absolutely yeah so I a thousand
percent so to to move up to the 20th
century
um and and this brings us kind of to my
more recent work
um absolutely there's a fantastic book
called racial hygiene and of course the
classic the Nazi doctors that makes just
this point that um before there were or
before the Nazis were even in power
there was this very effective Public
Health campaign that enlisted just like
in the last few years
um Medical Professional associations uh
enlisted doctors
um you know played on their desire for
status and recognition and they were
kind of corralled into uh being the
moderators of racial hygiene and that
took the shape of course of rounding up
teenagers who were impaired and sending
them off for treatment and then their
families never saw them again and that
was years before the extermination camps
uh yeah well that the whole doctrine of
racial Purity and blood Purity which was
a Hallmark of Hitler's
um populist attractiveness let's say was
all contamination language absolutely I
read Hitler's table talk for example
it's very interesting book so it's a
collection of his spontaneous discourse
at dinner time over about a four year
period and it's it's absolutely 100
percent saturated it's disgust-oriented
language and he bathed four or five
times a day oh my God it's quite
interesting yeah yeah well and also he
was a worshiper of will power and
there's a really tight relationship
between that proclivity for
authoritarian control and the exercise
of what you might describe as power and
will and that seems integrally
associated with the discussed axis and
the the activation of what's being
described as the extended immune system
and so a discussed response is part of
the behavioral immune system right so if
you see something disgusting and you gag
that's that's a physiological response
obviously to some degree but it's also a
psychological response and that sense
that you want to flee from or clean
yourself if you've been contaminated is
also an element of a behavioral immune
system and if it gets politicized in a
particularly pathological way you don't
want to be in the category of
contaminant to put it that way no mercy
there's no mercy right there's no mercy
weirdly enough too you know um
when when the discussed literature
started to roll out
the proclivity for disgust Associated
contamination seemed to be more typical
of people who had a conservative bent
It's associated with conscientiousness
for example but and I don't understand
this at all
something has changed in the last four
or five years because you've seen the
left possessed by this contamination
frenzy both on the ideational front in
the form of council culture but also in
the and I have no idea what to make of
this I mean to me it's an absolute
mystery miracle in some sense that the
left Allied themselves with the
pharmaceutical companies because I
couldn't imagine that ever happening in
my entire life it's like I thought you
people put the pharmaceutical companies
up there with the energy companies let's
say in terms of intrinsically
reprehensible and then all of a sudden
under the covid pressure I mean it's not
like conservatives reacted much better
because they really didn't but but it's
still very surprising to see the left
doing that and I don't really understand
what's changed in the culture so that
the left has picked up this
contamination frenzy and has introduced
it into
extended immune adjacent behaviors like
cancer culture which is a form of
disgust related shunning okay totally
yeah you anticipated what I was going to
say I think in recent memory before 2020
indeed it was the right that was more
reactive to not wanting to be and they
used language like this in the 80s and
it wasn't pretty you know I remember in
the AIDS
epidemic it was conservatives talking
about
um infectious
the fear of infection from homosexuals
or you know and it was ideological
infection cultural infection as well as
a fear which was irrational of physical
infection
um but
but indeed the the polls had completely
flipped
um and it used to be as you say that
liberals in America and I'm using the
American usage of liberals people on the
left were more open to cross-pollinating
ideas more open to immigrants more open
to the strange the other the alien
um you know more open to Freedom right
civil Free Speech the Free Speech
movement uh and it was conservatives who
were you know concerned about
porousness if you like you know
ideologically and in on a community
level maybe even on a personal level
Purity
um and and absolutely in the last three
years I agree with you like Amenia like
tulip media like you know I keep going
back to
um extraordinary popular delusions The
Madness of crowds you know a delusion
has come upon the left in the last three
years since covid that leads them to be
more Masky more irrational about
infection from covid
more shunning you know more shunning in
a kind of tribal Old Testament sort of
way than anyone could have ever believed
and to have forgotten all of their
critical thinking about things like I
wonder if uh you know well you see one
of the ways that Trump appealed to his
populist conservative base was by using
imagery of the wall and that's pretty
effective imagery when you're appealing
to people who are intrinsically
conservative but I wonder maybe what's
happened is some something like this is
that the rate of change has accelerated
to such a degree
that it's even exceeded the
psychological capacity of those who are
more open and creative to assimilate
right because we've never been in a
situation like that in the history of
the world I mean I was ill for about two
years and I was out of the technological
world and so all my computers got
outdated for example and you know it
took me about six months to put all my
electronics back together so I could
understand them after only a two-year
Hiatus and we're in a situation now
where there's unbelievable unbelievably
radical change in virtually every
dimension of human endeavor that you can
possibly imagine and we don't really
know what even creative people how even
creative people will react when even
their capacity for transformation has
been exceeded so maybe you're seeing the
emergence of a strange kind of
conservatism on the more open left that
wouldn't have been likely in a time when
things were changing somewhat slower you
know I don't I because I have no idea
what to make of it I don't know I'm not
I I'm not persuaded because you know the
change is happening to to everyone and
and yet the people who are remaining
open-minded and my experience and who
are willing to engage with the facts
that are being brought forward by
credible people that contradict the
dominant narrative
um are on our conservatives and
Libertarians right now and yeah no it's
very strange and also you see a lot of
Rise of humor on the conservative and
libertarian side as well and this is
something I also can't make heads or
tails of I mean emergence of of
organizations like the Babylon bee I
mean when they first emerged into the
public Consciousness it was quite a
shock to me because I thought well how
the hell did the conservatives get the
comedians like that's just not how
things work and but it is how things
work at the moment certainly the funnest
funniest comedy shows I've seen in the
last three or four years have all had a
I would say a conservative libertarian
tilt to them partly because those are
the people who will say whatever they it
is that they have to say and you see
that in popular culture too is on on
forums like Netflix it is the more
libertarian and conservative comedians
who are certainly a the funniest and
also B pulling in the largest audiences
I mean I I think we can make of it and I
feel kind of empowered to say this is
having spent my life on the left you
know the left
hopefully temporarily has lost its mind
so there's a lot more to make fun of
um they're more rigid and people who are
rigid I mean going back to Charlie
Chaplin and you know the The Great
Dictator you know rigidity is always
funny you know it needs to have fun
poked at it
um and the left is more irrational right
now I mean they're believing things that
are not true or they're not willing to
admit that they've been wrong or in you
know in terms of my most recent work
they're not willing to admit that
they've been part of a you know
condoning or facilitating the greatest
crime against humanity ever which we
haven't gotten into yet but
you know that's my view of the um roll
out of the these mandates the MRNA
injections um which my team of experts
has found to be so very deadly and so
very damaging so you know in a situation
like that grown-ups say
um okay you know we've got to re-examine
the facts and I'm sorry and they're not
able to do that they're being more and
more stuck in delusion more and more
committed to delusion and and they
created they they welcomed a two-tier
Society in you know erected in the space
of less than two years that ostracized a
whole sector of people and got them
kicked out of their jobs
um prevented kids who you know didn't
have this injection from going to school
in some states
um you know mandated people to to their
detriment and you know made people like
their travel rates immensely in Canada
immensely
staggering manner it's shocking I can't
go to Canada used to be the most
reasonable Western country in the world
and I can't go to Canada for reasons
that have nothing to do with science
right nothing to do with science so so
the left betrayed all of its most
cherished ideals and won't even
space that so there's a gap gaping moral
hole in the center of culture on the
left
um and until they recognized it and
reckon with it and say oh my God you
know we we became oppressors we became
the equivalent of racist you know we we
abandoned our our best ideals we became
dogmatists and fundamentalists and and
we abandoned science we abandoned
compassion until they're able to do that
um they they can't come to terms with
reality
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
documentary logos and literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung
amazing here we have a Gutenberg Bible
printed on the price of Johann gooper
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
okay so there's a lot of there's a lot
to delve into there I I wanted to do
that I want to go back to your book The
Beauty myth and I want to
um I want to say a few things on the
beauty front and gather your reactions
to those and
um
and I also am interested in
I would say the motivations behind
writing that book in relationship to the
experiences that we already described
so I spend a lot of time studying people
like David Buss and bus is a very good
example an evolutionary psychologist and
I like David's work a lot I think he's a
very solid scientist and there's been a
lot of interesting work generated out of
the evolutionary psychology literature
on the gender relations front so for
example one of the more compelling
findings from The evolutionary
psychologists
is the relationship between
perceived sexual attractiveness
particularly in the long-term mating
context and
socioeconomic status now it's probably
not socioeconomic status as indexed by
wealth it's probably wealth as an index
of productive competence but in any case
the correlation between perceived mate
attractiveness
uh
with regards to women perceiving men the
correlation between socioeconomic status
and perceived attractiveness is about
0.6 which is a higher correlation than
the correlation between General
cognitive ability and grades and I use
that as an example because that's one of
the most robust and Powerful findings in
the social sciences whereas the
correlation between socioeconomic status
and perceived mate attractiveness for
women by men is zero or slightly
negative so it's a walloping difference
and that's associated with the
proclivity of women to preferentially
mate across hierarchies and up and men
to meet across hierarchies in down
that's relatively well established
cross-culturally and the proclivity
doesn't ameliorate much in say the
Scandinavian countries it ameliorates
slightly and then there are other
Hallmarks of attractiveness on the
female side and this is where I want to
go with the beauty myth we know that
babies for example will gaze much longer
even as newborns at symmetrical faces
and there is this doll-like aspect that
you described so one of the Hallmarks of
sexual attractiveness is neotenic faces
and so there's a proclivity for
organisms to evolve towards their
juvenile forms that's neotni and it's
such a pervasive tendency that it even
characterizes animated characters as uh
Stephen J Gould was at pains to
establish it's quite comical but one of
the Hallmarks of cuteness is
of babyishness of face and you can see
that in the like plush toys and the
sorts of things that are often bought as
dolls for kids or or for sentimental
adults have very large eyes very small
noses very symmetrical faces there's all
sorts of Hallmarks of Beauty from a
biological perspective many of them seem
to be associated with fecundity
um particularly on the female side and
that is very harsh it's a very very
harsh standard and when I read the
beauty myth which was a long time ago by
the way because it was published in what
91 93 93 yeah 93 93.
um I was curious about what you made of
the biological markers of beauty and
what you how you think that plays into
what did you describe the Iron Maiden
straitjacket that's placed on women in
terms of the what the ideal of their
sexual self-presentation mission
right so thank you for asking you may be
right it may actually have been 91 um
came out first in Britain and then in
the United States so respectfully I'm
familiar with these arguments and uh
respectfully I'm very familiar with
David buss's work and I I think that
it's fundamentally flawed and I'll I'll
get to why
um
so first let me concede
um you know of course uh it's it's
thoroughly documented that there are
markers of
um health and attractiveness uh Health
infertility that are often
cross-cultural
um and certainly symmetrical features
um you know Rosy Skin showing good
circulation you know youth uh all of
those are kind of transcendental
um
markers for attractiveness however one
giant intellectual flaw respectfully in
um pretty much all of the studies that
I've seen of The evolutionary biologists
is that they focus on these markers in
women and they don't
um test for what women find attractive
in men they they project or they
construct kind of experiments or surveys
that prove tendentiously in my view that
women find wealth uh or professional
accomplishment attractive and that that
kind of substitutes for physical Beauty
but they don't ask women who are
heterosexual
um what are the markers for you of
Beauty in men or attractiveness in men
and if they did and they don't they
would find broad shoulders they would
find you know symmetry they would find
maybe you know sorry penis size
um you know they would find maybe
a a muscle tone that shows that they can
kind of effectively you know impregnate
a woman they they would probably find
height as a marker right and it's
notable to me like they they have they
have investigated that I mean there is a
fair bit of overlap in the biomarkers
let's say for what men and women find
mutually physically attractive although
the way that's manifested varies to some
degree as you pointed out shoulder to
waist ratio for example is a marker as
you can see in superhero portrayals of
men for example and the the the the
Cardinal difference seems to be too
though you know it's also not the
sophisticated evolutionary psychologists
don't assume that women are after wealth
what they assume is that women will use
markers of wealth as indicators of
productive competence right but tonight
because to me that's also a conceptual
flaw
um I'll get to why in just a minute but
I know I have to note for the record as
a feminist analyst that I have literally
never seen a study that asks women if
they find penis size a marker for sexual
attractiveness and I think scientists
don't want to run that study male
scientists don't want to run that study
because it would be unpopular
conclusions
um so I I guess to me the whole field of
evolutionary biological studies that
conclude that sexual attractiveness is a
is is kind of um gendered female and uh
and that for males there are other
proxies for sexual attractiveness is
really convenient for men
um because they don't have to come up
against the raw brief fact that there
are you know physical things women
evaluate men for if they're heterosexual
just like their physical things men let
me ask you about that a little bit too
because you say that it's convenient for
men and so I mean I'm I'm never certain
what form of differential
perception on the part of each sex is
convenient for which sex I mean the
entire sexual Battlefield let's say is
fraught with catastrophe an opportunity
for both sexes I mean one of the things
you do see for example is that women are
much harsher in the evaluations of
attractiveness of men than men are of
women so women men rate women 50 percent
of women as below attractive below
average in attractiveness and women rate
80 percent of men as below average in
physical attractiveness and well and and
like I am I I want to be absolutely 100
crystal clear here that I am not blaming
women for this I understand why this is
I believe now it's in the interest of a
woman biologically and practically
to find a partner who is as competent as
competent as she is or more competent
because fundamentally what she's trying
to do is redress the differential burden
that reproduction places on women and so
totally the reason that women totally
disagree with you I think that's out of
date respectfully but I'll wait for you
to finish okay well okay well so I'm
curious about why you would why you
would consider that because consider
that out of date because first of all
one of the definitions of what
constitutes female biologically is the
female sex biologically speaking is
almost invariably the sex that devotes
more biological time and energy to
reproduction than the alternative sex so
you see that even at the level of sperm
and Aid because the egg has a volume
that is multiple thousands of times
larger than the sperm and even at that
level there's more
resources being devoted to the difficult
job of reproduction of the female level
and of course women
have a nine month gestation period which
is very onerous and then they do they
are charged with primary responsibility
for infant caregiving especially during
the first year and we know perfectly
well that the differential burden of
reproduction on women is such that
single women who have a child are much
more likely to descend into poverty and
the reason for that at least in part is
well it's actually very difficult to
have a child and it's a 40 hour a week
job at minimum and to add the necessity
of
working and providing on top of that
means an 80-hour work week and so it
isn't obvious to me why the hypothesis
that women would be motivated to redress
that
fundamental biological differential I
don't understand why that would be an
objectionable hypothesis even from the
feminist perspective well let me just
recognize that women are more at risk on
the sexual and reproductive front
I mean I recognize
what you're saying there
um
I guess what I would say is
there are as many I like get first let
me say I think the whole field of
evolutionary biology
being presented to explain contemporary
21st century gender roles or
expectations or Norms is respectfully uh
I think it has almost no intellectual
Merit I'm sorry I don't mean to be rude
because you can I mean I've read the
whole range of evolutionary biologists
biologists who are usually invoked right
and they're always 10 dashes and they're
always talking about circumstances that
no longer exist historically so
um you know you could just as easily
draw on I believe it's Helen Fisher who
uh or other feminist evolutionary
biologists who make the case that
um women are best served by adultery
because they're getting
um a good range of sperm you know and
the the best suited sperm is the is the
sperms that doesn't count for that does
account for uh for for cheating behavior
and most of the evolutionary
psychologists who have their act
together take that into account is that
what the optimal strategy if you're
being cold-hearted about it biologically
especially for a woman who hasn't
optimized her mate Choice might be to
find someone stable in second rate and
then to change sporadically to produce
that biological diversity and that does
seem to be something approximating a
stable biological solution even though I
don't think it's an optimal one right
well I think the sophisticated
evolutionary psychologists have taken
that into account gotcha but let me just
speak to why that kind of very beloved
and I have to notice that it's beloved
of the whole kind of you know Dawkins
crowd the whole selfish Gene crowd is it
kind of loves this idea of the young
fertile female who needs to find that
unattractive older wealthy man
um who happens to be a scientist a
scientist and and and and also you know
accounts for or always gives males a
kind of well you're just polygamous or
you just need lots of sexual partners
and it's good for you know it's good for
the reproduction of the race of the
species
um so the reason I find these
tendentious and and especially you know
this notion of uh women optimizing the
material
the value of their partner to make up
for their reproductive deficits
um is that respectfully it's it's out of
date uh and what I mean by that is I
totally concede that you know women is
hard to be pregnant it's hard to have a
baby it puts you at a disadvantage
certainly um it's not accounted for in
you know contemporary work expectations
more so since the pandemic when
everyone's at home but you know when you
had to go to work obviously it's put
women at a disadvantage and they needed
a provider for those two years but I
will say that now I think that young men
for instance like a whole phenomenon
that I find fascinating I might find I
might find it fascinating as an older
woman who's married a much younger man
but I I find it fascinating that when I
was writing the beauty myth older women
were considered done reproductively or
sexually and now that's no longer the
case and that there's this whole um kind
of expectation now of young men finding
older women who are materially
successful and who can you know provide
them with with a good lifestyle really
attractive so I think that the
evolutionary biologists haven't
accounted for that you know even women
past reproductive age who are
financially successful or considered
really attractive to young men now so
that's the 21st century phenomenon it
never used to exist and
um the other thing that didn't used to
exist is if women have enough material
resources now they can hire someone and
I'm not saying this is optimal it's very
sad I'm with you on the value of the
nuclear family
but you know if they haven't married
someone who can look after them for that
brief window when a baby and you know a
nursing baby uh is is is is is impeding
your ability to kind of go it on your
own totally agree with that
um they can hire someone to help with
those two years so really the penalties
for being a single mom it's not easy if
you don't have resources I completely
concede you're gonna kind of go down the
the socioeconomic scale but if you do
have resources that's no longer the case
and that's why you're seeing you know so
much of what you criticize
um 21st century economic uh
opportunities have made it possible to
be an affluent single mom hire a
caregiver or hire you know someone to
help you raise the baby basically when
the baby's tiny and then starting from
three years old you know there are there
are child care centers daycare centers
that will take the baby and so I think
the evolutionary biologists haven't
accounted for what is going to result
from that is what we've seen results
from it which is I'm sorry to be rude
but the value of men has gone down and I
think that respectfully that's one of
the things I think is most useful about
your work respectfully I've been
thinking about this I think that's why
you've been so targeted by the
establishment is that you talk about the
value of men and you talk about you know
how men can be relevant in and consider
themselves to be relevant and have a
role in 21st century Society so I think
the great unspoken or under analyzed
phenomenon of 21st century is the
deconstruction of the value of men
um which completely upends The
evolutionary biologists kind of
narrative about men and women and you
know respectfully to kind of end on a
happy note I do think the value of your
work is that you're trying to give men
and succeeding in a lot of ways a role
in 21st century society in which they
they do have
um
they do have value but it's not going to
be the same thing where women could go
to love them it's an interesting that's
an interesting sub-topic because
no I've insisted to my viewers and
listeners
who are disproportionately male on the
YouTube front mostly because YouTube is
disproportionately male it's about 75-25
and so I don't differ from that much by
the way
um in fact I think I have more female
viewers than average by that Baseline
standard I mean I've
I've suggested to my young male viewers
continually that if they're rejected by
all women out of hand that they have to
take that burden onto themselves and not
assume that all the women are wrong and
that what they should strive to do while
the probability that you're right and
four billion people are wrong is one in
four billion it's rather low and so you
have to take that as a brute fact in
some sense and it might be unfair in
that women like men use a set of
criteria that you could describe as
arbitrary in some sense to make their
judgments but there's some things you're
not going to win an argument against and
that's definitely one of them but one of
the things I've suggested to young men
is that if they concentrated on making
themselves productive and generous that
the probability that that will increase
their ability to find a mate is
extraordinarily high and I do think
that's the case and that advantage of
Cruz as men mature
so what do you what do you think of that
as attack I mean I I I want to thank you
for my marriage because you are my
husband's he said tell him he's my
spirit animal you are one of my
husband's kind of um you know role
models and uh he listened to you and so
unlike other men of his generation he he
was all about like picking up the check
and being a provider and um it was it's
really attractive
um so a hundred percent I agree with you
why was it attractive why was it
attractive so now I'm gonna
throw a little bit of a wrench in your
argument it was attractive to me because
everyone likes some someone who is
competent enough to you know make money
I guess
um at whatever level they're making
money it shows that they're not a
feckless immature you know dependent
person uh and Everyone likes someone who
can look after them but what I'm gonna
add there is that I think men like women
who can look after them too and I think
men like women who are competent too and
I think just like it's sexy when a man
picks up a check it's sexy when a woman
picks up a check you know in due course
and I've heard plenty of men say you
know well I took her out three or four
or five or six times and she never made
a gesture to pick up the check and and
that's not attractive because women you
know I think that's the attractiveness
of reciprocity
you know it was one of the things you
really do want in a partner over the
long run and there's probably nothing
more important than this in a business
relationship or a friendship or an
intimate relationship is that
fundamentally the relationship to be
self-sustaining has to be reciprocal and
that doesn't mean that everybody gets
obsessive about making sure that the
distributions are 50 50 because they
really should be 75.75 right if you're
in a productive relationship both of you
are
what you both receive is more than the
sum total of what you both contribute
right if you optimize the relationship
and I think part of the reason that man
will appreciate women who pick up a
check is not necessarily because it's an
indication of their confidence although
I think that's part of it I think it is
definitely an indication of their
willingness and ability to reciprocate
which is fundamentally no I I don't know
and I don't know of any research that
pertains specifically to that issue
right
I guess what I'm saying to jump in is
that
um I think your analysis and The
evolutionary biologist analysis is
productively updated by this
reality which is fairly new that both
genders are surveilling the landscape
for people who are you know not only
sexually and reproductively attractive
but who will reciprocate who will take
care of them who can provide who are not
dependent and I do think that the kind
of woman who was considered very sexy in
the you know 60s when I was a child is
no longer considered sexy because she's
not able to
um contribute to to the household you
know that doll-like you know what is her
name
um Twiggy like you know inert uh
voiceless
person
I mean men who are competent May kind of
give it a pat ISS her a passing admiring
glance or have a one-night stand with
her but I don't think that that has a
high value any longer
do you think that's a historical
transformation or do you think it's more
a return to something approximating
Eternal Norm because here's something
interesting for example the the name Eve
the Hebrew original Hebrew term for the
name Eve which unfortunately I can't
remember at the moment means means
beneficial adversary really so yeah yes
it does it does and there's a notion
there that
the person who's the most well matched
to you as a potential partner is not
someone who passively submits to your
demands partly because your demands
might be unreasonable and pathological
and that's not good for you or them but
someone who's capable of engaging you in
something like a a provocative and
challenging reciprocal play if you if
you pick a play partner in a game
one-on-one basketball for example you're
not going to pick someone that you can
easily dominate if you have any sense
because it's not any fun what you really
want is someone who can spar with you at
the limit of your ability and that's a
strange way of conceptualizing a
relationship but it's not strange if you
know anything about how people
engage in the processes that lead to
further learning for example or the
expansion of skill is you're looking for
the edge of optimal competition and I I
think there were periods of time and the
Victorian period in England that you
described might have been one of them
where the female ideal is tilted more
towards one of passivity and that might
have been a reaction as you pointed out
to the
increased agitation on the female front
for a broader role in the public polity
but it isn't obvious to me that
historically speaking the feminine ideal
has been
passive that's happening from time to
time and so I'm so glad you said that
we're completely in alignment about that
it is what I'm describing is a return to
a pre-industrial
um ideal uh and it is only in the last
150 years or 200 years that um the
Industrial Revolution even made it
possible to have what you described
earlier which is thorsten veblen's um
description of a kind of doll-like you
know middle class middle class woman
whose only role is to be dressed and
displayed and to display the wealth of
her her spouse
um that is recent and before the
Industrial Revolution and in the you
know in America you know which is why
America is so interesting and American
women are all around the world until
recently admired as you know sexy
Independent Women right is is you needed
a partner who could you know if you're
going west who could
use a rifle if the Native Americans came
to the homestead when the man was out
hunting or if you were you know uh in a
feudal society could we versus or manage
the crops or the kitchen Garden or you
know all the like like literally a
household before the Industrial
Revolution
um had as active as a female sphere as a
male sphere productively and that only
changed or people died
pardon me or people died exactly so
absolutely women and this goes back to
the Old Testament you know that the
value of a woman of Valor her prices
above rubies and then it iterates all
the things she does she we you know she
weaves cloths she sells things to bring
her you know in income for the household
she's she's got so many areas of
economic activity as well as moral
activity
um and that's been true for most of
human history so
those those things were always you know
part of the marital equation before the
19th century you know not just is she
beautiful uh conventionally physically
but
um what are her skill sets how does she
embroider how does she cook you know how
can she can she keep people alive
um and so I'm just agreeing with you
about that so then I'm just like
updating it for a contemporary moment in
which uh people live longer than ever
um arguably uh healthy women past their
child bearing years of the ability like
you know we were all kind of decrepit
crones you know
by now women
um past their child bearing years and
and that's no longer the case because of
changes in health and and I don't know
what else and then
um also the economic you know potential
of women as I mentioned earlier has
changed so much at least women who are
middle or upper middle class
um that that I think effectively updates
your um your analysis but I love the
place you're landing on which is
um
good meeting habits extend challenge the
skill sets of both genders and there I
would say this is not new at all from a
woman's perspective or women's literary
history because look at Jane Austen
that's what all the dream men did they
they challenged the the the heroine to
the Limit like it was all about the play
the verbal play right the the
provocation the back and forth you know
no one wanted to marry that you know
sober industrious guy who just provided
you always wanted to marry the The
Dashing hero who
um you know I mean that classic scene of
any romance movie based on these Austin
novels based on that whole kind of
literary tradition of women writing of
the couple getting into an argument the
first time they meet you know that is
absolutely what you wanted a maid is
someone who will challenge you it's so
you grow and you're always learning yeah
well it's also very it's also very
useful to note I would say biologically
by the way that the marker for that
optimized combat is the spirit of play
so if the repartee that is emerging is
playful
that's a biological marker that the
information flow is being optimized and
that is that marker in in and of itself
that psychological transformation is
occurring at the optimized rate and it's
very useful to know that that there's an
instinct for that and it is the Instinct
for play
it's a good thing to keep at hand
because you know then when you're
engaged in any activity if you could
Elevate the level at which you're
engaged in that activity who the level
of free play that really means that
you're manifesting a real expertise in
that domain that would be certainly true
in intellectual discourse and I think
we've managed that to some degree in our
conversation so far today
sure and and as you're describing this I
also note I think you should read my
book on the vagina which is a sequel to
my book The Beauty myth because if you
haven't yet
um that is so much a part of women's
arousal like women will describe
if you ask women a woman what is sexy
a man being funny is way at the top of
this and why why is it sexy for a man to
be funny because
um women's kind of dopamine circuit is
directly connected to their sexual
response right and and so if someone's
like exciting and this is why you know
the heroes are always kind of taking
women on adventures and and like your
your whole kind of dopamine circuit
which is so connected in women's sexual
response is not activated by the boring
guy who never who's on the couch who's
you know channel surfing never goes
anywhere right it's activated by the man
who wants to take you on adventures who
wants to appreciate your adventures and
who can make you laugh
um because of those pleasure centers
being activated so really interesting
right but that's different than just
taking out like the boring guy
who's a really interesting one because
the thing about comedians is that they
they strike to the heart of the matter
they say what's not sayable in a manner
that's socially acceptable but slightly
transgressive right and so they're
demonstrating when they do that that
they're really attentive to the
what would you call it to the to the
niceties of time and place because your
your humor can't go too far it has to be
exactly on the edge and if it's on the
edge it'll produce that spontaneous
Outburst of laughter which is also
interestingly enough accompanied by
muscular weakness right people can't
fight when they're laughing because you
can't sustain any
any prolonged physical Endeavor when
you're laughing and so laughter puts you
in a state of play right away and so
it's extremely interesting these things
are extremely deep right I mean that
that instinct for play is so deep that
it actually deactivates the musculature
and so it's not something it's not
something merely cognitive no more than
you think about whether something is
funny before you laugh because you don't
you laugh long before you think about it
because you get the joke and you're in
the spirit of play so let me ask you
we're going to run out of time
unfortunately and that's too bad because
there's so many things we can talk about
I think what we should talk about on The
Daily wire plus side is
how you think the left cornered itself
in the last decade I'd really be
interesting to hear interested to hear
what you think about that what I would
like to do maybe to close up our
conversation because we are almost out
of time is
I'm curious about I'm always interested
in people's motivations being a rabid
clinical psychologist and so I'm always
digging under the surface I suppose to
try to clarify things and for me and
maybe for whoever I'm talking about now
you said that when you went to Yale and
you had the unfortunate and terrifying
experiences that you a disheartening
experiences that you had there that that
derailed your central intellectual
interest and and then you spent decades
in the hinderlands in some ways
exploring topics that weren't your
primary category of interest and so I'm
wondering
when you look back at the beauty myth
what do you think that part of what you
were doing perhaps was analyzing the
perceptual
preconditions
for you having been
categorized let's say by Harold Bloom as
an attackable Target I mean were you
investigating the you see what I mean
were you investigating the structure of
prejudice of perceptual Prejudice that
increased the probability of
objectification of the sort that you
experienced in this very dramatic form
yeah that's a great question Dr Peterson
I mean
certainly consciously
I was aware as a very young woman
because I was a very young woman when I
wrote the beauty myth I was in my 20s
like early 20s um I was aware that I
considered myself smart and an
intellectual uh and I was constantly
being objectified you know but in that
I'm completely having exactly similar
experiences to millions of other very
young women who are smart and capable
and ambitious and constantly being
objectified so absolutely the beauty
myth was an effort to understand that in
order to get through it and you know
Master it and integrate it to some
extent so it was an analysis of
objectification let's say yeah I don't
think it was an analysis of sexual
assault because I don't think
objectification and sexual assaults are
the same thing
um but I I do think if you're looking
for unconscious motivations my work
dating from the end of America in which
I was focused on torture
um and and surveillance and my more
recent work in which I recognized
how violent and
a coercive Society can become definitely
arose from my experience of being raped
as a child and then molested as a young
adult
um because they're on a Continuum and
and the body responds to these things
the way the body responds to torture or
to war
um and lots of good science has emerged
about that um one really wonderful book
is the body keeps score about trauma
um
right exactly so
and then about kind of the Hinterlands I
mean I I can't complain about my career
uh having I mean it got derailed
um you know like you got derailed
productively I guess I did choose my
subjects obviously I became more of an
activist and I guess partly my
experience of Injustice and obstacles to
a meritocratic outcome for me uh led to
my you know engagement in more activist
writing and I can't complain about that
it was necessary it was helpful I had to
eat Best Sellers as I mentioned
um you know I got to be a famous
public intellectual uh it wasn't my
first choice right so
I guess that's just what God had in
store for me but it it certainly I mean
I guess what I'm trying to say is it was
a derailment of what I wanted to do but
I think it was a productive use of the
last you know 35 years nonetheless
yeah well I think you know part of
the Hallmark of a successful life is
the ability to turn stumbling blocks
into opportunities I mean you know that
the best laid plans of mice and men and
women obviously as well go astray and
your the ability to be successful is to
some degree the ability to dance with
some of the arbitrary constrictions of
fate and so you know who knows how that
works out in the final analysis
um it doesn't work out the way you
envision things would to begin with but
I think that's true of many people's
lives life takes all sorts of twists and
turns all right so for everyone who's
listening and watching
um it is going to be obvious to all of
you that this conversation
could go many more places and it would
have been good had we had the time to do
that but I am going to switch over to
the Daily wire plus front and I think
we're going to focus the conversation
there on what's happened on the
political front on the left in recent
years I know Dr Wolf has concentrated on
that to a large degree particularly in
her reaction to the well we call it the
covid epidemic but it really wasn't it
was you know the Swedish data show for
example if you do a two-year smoothing
of mortality that there was no epidemic
at all
not surprised Sweden it's quite
remarkable and so really what we had was
an epidemic of imitating Chinese
authoritarians that's actually what we
had yes absolutely it was I agree with
the psychogenic epidemic of totalitarian
impulse and the the covid virus was the
excuse for it but not the reason in fact
it isn't obvious at all that there was a
reason at all and so that's really quite
terrifying and so we can delve into that
to some degree on The Daily wire plus
side of things too and so for all of you
watching and listening thank you very
much for your time and attention Dr
Naomi wolf thank you for agreeing to
talk to me today and to the Daily wire
plus
organization thanks for facilitating the
conversation the film crew here I'm in
Oxford today so that's always
entertaining and I got actually invited
to the Oxford literary Festival strange
strangeness of strange things yes uh so
I'm not so much oh yes I'm not so much
Persona non-grad as I once was so that's
an interesting thing to see
um so anyways we're gonna flip over to
the Daily wear plus side and uh thank
you very much for agreeing to talk to me
today thank you so much Dr Pearson I
appreciate it
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com